good afternoon and welcome to another
edition of news feature I'm Corey Dubin
your daily host on news feature today we
will present a discussion with john
stockwell former CIA case officer head
of the end-goal a task force and author
of in search of enemies an expose of
u.s. involvement during the civil war in
Angola and CIA operations around that
Civil War good afternoon John hi John
recently you've been touring and
speaking and spending a lot of time
looking at and talking about the
situation in Central America of course
one of the main focuses of the situation
in Central America has been the USA's
not-so-secret war against the government
of Nicaragua and the support control and
financing of the Contras by the Central
Intelligence Agency let's talk a bit
about that operation and about the CIA's
position and their involvement in it
well the CIA's technique and nicaragua's
it's a covert action it's called a
destabilization it's what's done when
you have a government in the capital
that you don't like of a target country
and you want to discomfort them or put
pressure on them as Reagan says which
would sound you know okay if you were
talking about putting pressure on the
Democratic Party or in the Democratic
presidential candidate but the CIA's
technique is to make the people of the
the target country so totally miserable
that the social and economic fabric of
the country simply tear apart and then
the government can't govern and then you
can make them come to terms or you know
hopefully throw them out of office it's
that's the simple techniques can only be
described as terrorism literally
rape and pillage going across the border
and blowing up bridges pulling up
clinics blowing up sawmills blowing up
greeneries shooting father's and then
while they're dying on the ground with
their family forced to watch castrating
them and then putting a grenade in their
mouth and pulling the pins and in some
cases the opposite putting a grenade
in the mouth of seven-year-old children
and pulling the pan while the parents
are forced to watch with the objective
of just totally shocking and
traumatizing the people to the point
where like I say the society just can't
function and the country falls apart
meanwhile you you coordinate that with
pulling every international string you
can to shut them off from capital from
finance from cooperation of other
countries and multinational corporations
and the third wing the third element is
propaganda you pull just pull every
string you can to get articles in every
element of the media to make them look
bad to describe them as incompetent that
described them as as brutal if you can a
totalitarian if you can to discredit
their democratic processes and this all
of these are being done and Nicaragua
they were done in Chile successfully
72-73
they were done against China for 19
years without success eventually we gave
up became big friends with China and by
the way that one got us into the Korean
War they were done in Vietnam for 25
years altogether intelligence officers
which led us directly unto the Vietnam
War was done against Cuba seven years
very heavily in the early 60s and then
at a lesser a slower pace since then
without success it didn't and it
stressed out Cuba it had made Castro and
his police work harder and the what you
could describe is more repressive and he
hasn't completely lived down the
international image yet but Cuba is
strong democratically it's strong
economically so I don't you know it
hasn't succeeded against Cuba yet John
in terms of the specifics of the
operation in Nicaragua the involvement
of Honduras Honduras has been virtually
turned into a US base military and
Central Intelligence Agency and how does
that work the CIA moves into
country how does specifics of that
operate well it isn't just CIA this
operation is an obsession of the Reagan
government the army is deeply involved
general Gorman Howard Air Force Base in
Panama the Navy is all over the place
the Army Corps of Engineers has been
building what is it six bases of
different kinds in Honduras including
air strips including logistical bases
are in our bases they you know complete
with officers clubs but most
particularly with the radar
installations to cover the planes and
shipping on the coast the in conjunction
with the build up of Honduras and mind
you the CIA is using Honduras in two
ways one is it's the training base for
the Contras and the launching point to
send the Contras into Nicaragua it it
it's function beyond that would be to
manipulate to the greatest extent
possible Honduran politics to keep our
position protected there and they
haven't been completely successful there
Honduras is definitely restless under
United States domination it's taken away
you know any any facade of Independence
on the part of Honduras they're
functioning like a colony now as
instruments of our foreign policy that's
an interesting thought John because it
seems like in some ways US policy in
countries that we consider our allies
like Honduras or other countries seems
to be one of the main motivating forces
in the development of revolutionary
movements ultimately but first in the
disruption of the country which tends to
move the general population towards a
more critical analysis well it's the
arrogance of power it runs you know not
just the third world we have a hundred
bases in England and the British people
you know they don't control those bases
they don't have access to those bases
they can't decide our control when the
missiles are fired from those bases you
know so the England is an occupied
country to all practical purposes in
Honduras of course is small and weak
very
poor and weak and it's just completely
dominated and used by the United States
this breeds bitterness it breeds
revolution as Walter Lefevre writes
inevitable revolutions but the United
States has been this kind of hegemony
over Central America for well over a
hundred years now and it's continuing
today and this is really what's at stake
in Central America we have Nicaragua as
finally the first country truly to break
away from United States Dominion they
threw out our collaborator our puppet
dictator Somoza and established of
People's Republic and and they they you
know their sincerity is well documented
building clinics and hospitals and
teaching people to read and write trying
to get land to them very quickly coming
up with an energetic enthusiastic and
healthier country the Salvadorian people
want the same kind of freedom
the CIA has claimed all along that it's
all caused by Cuba and that the
Salvadorian revolution is made possible
by the flow of arms from Nicaragua and
this is oblivious of the true issues of
course it's what what what really is
coming from Nicaragua is the energy of
the example and this is why it's
desperately important our our country I
believe this I don't believe you can
reach any other conclusion but to take
President Reagan at face value he says
we will do whatever is necessary and
this is the Byward in Washington
whatever is necessary they are not able
to make it with the CIA and the Contras
they don't put in the Marines we're
gonna have a war in Central America John
two things that I want to touch on
there's still some debate some in some
sectors of this country we still hear in
the mainstream press a difference put
forth between the Contras and the CIA
and that the CIA has funded them to a
degree could the Contras operate and
survive without the Central Intelligence
Agency and does the Central Intelligence
Agency
completely control the Contra operation
against Nicaragua well they try to
control it and uh there's a lot at stake
politically in this country and so
President Reagan wants the Contras
controlled what's at stake it's the
subtlety or the the irony if you will of
the Boland Amendment which said that we
could not the CI could not work to
overthrow the Sundanese to government so
the CI with its traditional play on
words and President Reagan said we're
not we're just trying to inter date the
flow of arms and then proceeded to arm
them the Contras were saying all along
you know [ __ ] we're trying to
overthrow the capital Managua and it's
gonna be a bloodbath when we make it and
this is embarrassing to Reagan and so
they're doing whatever they can to
control and suppress not completely
successfully but trying to no last
spring the Congress shut off the money
and what the CI did Reagan
administration did essentially was help
set up encouraged them to persist saying
we'll be back to you after the elections
and then try to set up helped them to
set up alternative sources of funding to
carry them over to tide them over now
the recent last week's voting and
Congress shut off the money through next
spring now President Reagan even if he
wins in a landslide he's going to have
trouble getting money from the CI so
they're gonna have to fund them through
other sources which seemed to be Israel
and then corporations here in the states
and unification Church here in the
states they are getting money at the
rate of about a million and a half a
month which is enough to keep a thing
like that going if not to buy a lot of
big helicopters and things you can keep
the soldiers fed and bullets and the
guns and keep them functioning and that
will be a holding operation until the
the next you know fiscal opportunity to
increase to get another 20,000 or 50,000
unless reagan decides in the meanwhile
to plunge in with the US troops and make
it into a war john the other
a question that's been debated you
mentioned a minute ago the reported flow
of arms from Nicaragua to El Salvador
it's my understanding that we have
regular satellite overflights of the
Gulf of Fonseca you two flights a top
spy ship hovering outside of the Gulf
and yet they've delivered no hard
evidence but the administration
continues to state that Nicaragua is
supplying the FML and FDR with arms it
says it's what's known as a cover story
if they had one shred of evidence they
would be trumpeting it to the world on
television and they don't and this is
you know easy to conclude they try
they've tried a couple of times to say
well we can't show you what we've got
but you know they've shown us satellite
photographs and Grenada and twisted
they're you know they're meaning they're
lied about them but showed us the
satellite photography there's nothing
that they could have documenting a flow
of arms there's a guy by the way David
McMichaels who was the analyst in the
CIA contract analyst who's come public I
was lecturing with him jointly up in the
Bay Area just just last week and he has
a very museum at a very effective way of
pointing out you know the great arms
fines they've they found one shipment of
arms and it consisted of a hand grenade
and two rifles and they found a mother
ship unloading arms and it didn't you
know it didn't come or go from Nicaragua
and you know and he makes the case
crystal-clear in fact that's why the CIA
did not renew his contract is because he
was asking them they were asking him to
write reports about the flow of arms and
he was saying what flow of arms and they
were saying take our word for it
and he was saying no show me you know
some of the evidence and he was fighting
him in that sense so they wanted to get
somebody who was more amenable to the
party line it's a cover story nothing
more it's a cover story for aggression
John let's change focus a little and go
from Nicaragua to events in Grenada the
destabilization program against Grenada
which was well documented
the ocean venture 81 and 82 military
exercises that were clearly exercises
looking towards an invasion of Grenada
what we now know is was a
destabilization effort against the new
jewel movement and then a US invasion
talked a little bit about the whole
Grenada operation and how it fits in to
what we've been discussing about
Nicaragua and what's happening in that
part of Central America and the
connection of the two areas the
Caribbean and Central America well the
connection is kind of twofold President
Reagan and the people around him have
outlined their their plan and Republican
revolution the Reagan Revolution in this
country and reshaping the world and in
the earliest days they talked about
cleaning up our own backyard as they put
it at reversing the situation in Grenada
which they have done Nicaragua which
they're in the process of doing
stabilizing as they call it the
situation in El Salvador and they talk
of a military solution to the Cuban
problem which means an invasion of Cuba
and the owl stir by force of Fidel
Castro and the government of Cuba now in
that program Grenada was both the first
step and it was also the dress rehearsal
to the invasion of Nicaragua what you
have happened basically was in 1981 Al
Haig proposed to put US troops into
Central America and to go the go to the
source Cuba with meaning a major war the
people of this country were pulled to be
89 percent against it and so the
Department of Defense and the White
House would not support him and so he
didn't and he was frustrated now you
know we're not speculating about this he
writes this in his memoirs and his
frustration he couldn't get them to go
along with the argument then was in 81
they would have three years before the
elections to clean it up and the White
House didn't see it that way in the
Department of Defense because the people
of this country weren't ready for a war
and they have they have studies they
even have books they've written which
say about how the failure of Vietnam was
a failure to prepare and control the
people
failure to control the media's access to
the war so they spent four years
preparing the people in preparing laws
to control the media and control the
people's activities during the next war
and that like Grenada was a dress
rehearsal a very successful showy and
very very popular exciting people with
the effectiveness of a decisive military
they lied about every aspect of the
rationales of that thing but the lies
work the people bought it the press you
know permitted it to happen and they
were able to cram their rationales there
their lies down the world's thro the
public the American public's throat if
not the world's throat and now they're
preparing the same scenario and
Nicaragua now nineteen days before
Maurice Bishop was killed I was in
Grenada he had invited me to move there
if I chose to write books and I decided
not to do it but I was I was there I was
talking to him we had drinks up a
displace it not Wellborn and discussed
the the certainty we both felt of the
United States invasion and we were
looking at the indicators now we had
talked on previous occasions about the
sea-ice destabilization of the country
we did not talk at that time about the
challenge that was soon to come to him
from Bernard Coard
and we just you know it was delicate
thing we didn't get into that the timing
of it was I think partly by coincidence
and then partly of course when when the
bodies of the US Marines are coming back
from Lebanon to this country it was
covered by the dramatic invasion of
Grenada so nobody was paying that much
attention to the bodies themselves and a
horror of what had happened over there
and the shame not for those young men
but for the Reagan administration for
having sacrificed them so foolishly this
was masked by this dramatic show little
invasion I am very deeply concerned at
the winds of war I see blowing
at the superficiality of this country
including top editors of the New York
Times for example with some I've dealt
in the last week and they're saying how
can you be talking about war when
everybody's talking about peace you know
this is what's called playing the peace
card as Howard's Enright's you need the
people the establishment needs the
people at the time of the elections and
then they can do what they want this is
the art a gesture it's no coincidence
that this thing is two weeks before the
our own elections here big showy thing
Reagan is going to go to Grenada and
they're going to take a long medical
studio for the medical students who were
supposedly saved there were no danger
but you know we're saved and make a big
big dog-and-pony show across the nation
and television films of him visiting
Grenada and and it's gonna be a very
powerful thing both in terms of ensuring
his popularity for the elections but
also in setting up the invasion of
Nicaragua I think it's clear John that
the whole events in El Salvador were
planned this way channels between the
FDR FMLN and Duarte have been open for
some time in terms of FML and FDR
initiatives to dort date to talk why do
art they chose to make his announcement
in the United States at the United
Nations two weeks before the election
seemed to have tipped us off who cover
El Salvador extensively that this was in
fact decided by the Reagan
administration it's pretty crass it's
pretty blunt well and it's incredible
how well accept that it's been in this
country I mean well you know the the
Reagan administration deals with the
American people the voters with with
complete contempt and and they justify
this contemptuous treatment by
responding favorably it you don't have
to read very much and you don't have to
think at all to see through these kind
of manipulations and the minute the
fraud of the Grenada thing for example
and there are a lot of people who do see
through it and do reject it and are
upset about it and there are a lot of
people who see the war coming in Central
America and they're deeply upset about
it but unfortunately you know
including some some people who should
know better like I say I've dealt
recently with editors of the New York
Times and they're saying you know how
can you meet all of you this blunt talk
about was writing a letter form you know
I was saying it's it's so blunt you know
it's it's it's exaggerated
you know how can you exaggerate when
you're plunging into a war they're
saying but everybody's talking about
peace yeah they're talking about peace
but they're preparing for war well it
seems like the country in some ways is
in this collective sleep in terms of
accepting the rhetoric without really
looking under the rock because if you
look closely it's clear what you're
saying about the preparations for war
they're all around I mean people who
live adjacent to military installations
that I know call us and talk to us about
increased fighter activity increased
training exercises US forces training
and deserts I mean all these yeah in the
operation the big pine one in devotion
venture Grenadier at one where you have
350 ships 2000 planes 30,000 soldiers
rehearsing the invasion of Nicaragua of
course the Reagan administration says
that's to put pressure on Nicaragua do
you have any idea how much that costs to
keep 350 ships going around in circles
for four straight years gotta be
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
millions of dollars elute what about the
latest thing we're getting John and
we've been getting it and you mentioned
that Hague was talking about going right
to the source in terms of our
perceptions of Cuba within Cuba today
they are they have implemented are
beginning to implement a very serious
civil defense program in terms of
preparing the island for an invasion yet
when for instance we report that people
say oh you're kidding the Cubans are
paranoid mm-hmm some guy called me on
the day and said you reported Cuban
intelligence said you know you're nuts I
mean what are the signs what do you see
John that tells you that we are
considering an invasion of Cuba
well this letter that I was writing to
the New York Times I wrote that that
they the State Department was speaking
contemptuously and the tone of the New
York Times article about Cuba's
preparations for war
was casting the Cubans preparations and
a paranoid light and said we have no
there's no change it
they didn't say by the way the State
Department that they had no plans to
invade Cuba they said there is no change
in our plans yes a little circumlocution
as they say and I wrote and then Ortega
was in the state saying that the u.s.
was prepared as of the 15th yesterday to
invade Nicaragua he didn't say they were
going to on the 15th but they were
prepared to poised to invade and he got
clobbered
oh he got clobbered by everybody saying
that's outrageous and that says we're on
the crest that world a piece yet they
cooked him and I was writing saying hey
you know Cuba and Nicaragua spheres have
more credibility than our leaders
denials right and then I went on to make
the case about the preparations for war
the rehearsal for invasion Al Haig
statements Reagan's statements Goldwater
statements about annexing Cuba Reagan
himself has said that we have to resolve
the Cuban problem with war and with the
speech he gave in Miami a year ago now
if you're up here it swelling that or if
you're in the ivory towers of New York
and Washington it's easy to sit back in
yon and say come on you know these
exaggerated reactions that's what they
said about my letter is it was
exaggerated but you know if you're
outside of the country and and you know
you're one of the peoples around this
clumsy a very very callous giant of a
country the United States right you know
they have to take presidents and
secretaries of state and top generals
and admirals statements at face value
they are mortally threatened by our
preparations to invade and by our
leaders statements it's it's a mortal
threat to them to their lives and to
their society they have to be preparing
to die John I wasn't struck by that to a
really great degree until I spent time
in both Cuba Nick oh yeah and I was
completely blown over being there
listening to my government here making
these statements and then watching the
response and then not only watching it
but feeling it
and understanding that the United States
was coming to Nicaragua and being all
over the country traveling and seeing
and talking with people and
understanding that when Reagan says
these things people respond and they
have to be taken at face value it seems
to be the North American public that
doesn't understand the reality of this
issue
people you know on the face of the earth
we think you know the rich country and
because we have television you know
we're well-informed
we don't read our own histories our
schools don't teach us our own history
just look at some simple facts this
country in its 200 year history has over
200 incidents of putting our troops into
other countries to force them to our
will Grenada was one of those incidents
we have spent 50 of 200 years at war and
we've gone to war every ten years of the
rest we've had 15 wars in each of these
wars the leadership has taught us to
hate the target people we were taught to
hate the Cherokees after gold was
discovered in Georgia to hate the
Seminole Indians after we decided to
annex Florida to hate the Mexicans twice
and we annexed Texas New Mexico Colorado
Arizona and California the Plains
Indians the Philippines has Spanish the
Cubans the Germans the Koreans the
Vietnamese in each case our leaders
exhorting us to their evil and the
necessity of doing this or saving lives
or whatever now in addition to that the
scholars Latin American scholars
primarily have counted and documented
seven hundred and eighty incidents in
which our country forced the leaders of
Central American countries to accept
actions imposed on them by the United
States that were in our interests are
not in their interests and see up here
we're oblivious of all is interestingly
enough people like Fidel and Maurice
Bishop for example in the comandante's
in Nicaragua don't blame the American
people they have said time and again the
American people are not evil when they
have the facts when they're taught the
truth they respond with compassion and
generosity but the leadership throughout
our history has time and again taught us
the necessity quote of harsh actions and
you know you're talking about people in
countries that are
forced to die at the age of 30 36 years
of age and die miserable deaths and be
brutalized be killed be raped we're
doing it right now and in Nicaragua
because President Reagan doesn't like
the Sandinistas if we could do a covert
action against China for 19 years and
then turn around and have them be our
great big giant friend that President
Reagan the anti-communist goes to and a
showy trip to bolster his chances for
re-election if we can do that then if we
can fight Pol Pot in Cambodia for years
and years and years and then turn around
a few years later and support him to the
United Nations then we could just as
easily support the Sundanese disease
attack them there is no rational
necessity in what we're doing there it's
just a compulsion to violence that
certain elements of our government have
and that's what we're doing with
brutalizing a country because people
just decided we do it right I think
that's an important point I think to
look at the flip-flops in policy and I
think the most glaring you mentioned for
me as a journalist covering the third
world was the covert support and then
open support that we now have given to
Pol Pot somebody we condemned I mean in
some of the most virulent rhetoric we
condemn Pol Pot as soon as Vietnam made
the choice to do something about what
was happening in Kampuchea then Pol Pot
became our friend you know after Paul
Pott had killed three to four million
people we sponsored him to the United
Nations right I mean for me that's an
incredible flip-flop John we're out of
time and I'd like to mention an event
that you're participating in tonight
it's the showing of a documentary that's
in the progress of being made called
Nicaragua strategies for peace and John
will be there speaking and that is
Tuesday October 16th that's tonight at
PS number one elementary school at 1447
Euclid Avenue in Santa Monica that's one
block south of Santa Monica
and that's sponsored by a coalition of
groups office of the Americas committed
a concern for Central America
Westside sis best Nicaragua task force
and the empowerment project and John
will be there
speaking on the Central Intelligence
Agency the program is news feature we
have been talking with former CIA case
officer and head of the Angola task
force john stockwell for news feature
i'm cory Dupin good afternoon